--- Page 1 ---
Large Language Model based Autonomous Task Planning for Abstract
Commands
Seokjoon Kwon1, Jae-Hyeon Park2, Hee-Deok Jang1, CheolLae Roh2, and Dong Eui Chang1∗
Abstract— Recent advances in large language models (LLMs)
have demonstrated exceptional reasoning capabilities in natural
language processing, sparking interest in applying LLMs to task
planning problems in robotics. Most studies focused on task
planning for clear natural language commands that specify
target objects and their locations. However, for more user-
friendly task execution, it is crucial for robots to autonomously
plan and carry out tasks based on abstract natural language
commands that may not explicitly mention target objects or
locations, such as ‘Put the food ingredients in the same place.’
In this study, we propose an LLM-based autonomous task
planning framework that generates task plans for abstract
natural language commands. This framework consists of two
phases: an environment recognition phase and a task plan-
ning phase. In the environment recognition phase, a large
vision-language model generates a hierarchical scene graph
that captures the relationships between objects and spaces
in the environment surrounding a robot agent. During the
task planning phase, an LLM uses the scene graph and the
abstract user command to formulate a plan for the given
task. We validate the effectiveness of the proposed framework
in the AI2THOR simulation environment, demonstrating its
superior performance in task execution when handling abstract
commands.
I. INTRODUCTION
As large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated ad-
vanced reasoning capabilities in language processing [1], [2],
research on task planning in robotics using LLMs has gained
considerable attention [3]. For a robot to autonomously
plan and execute tasks based on user commands without
intervention, both effective environment representation and
task planning technologies are essential. Consequently, there
has been active research into techniques for generating struc-
tured environment representations, as well as task planning
methods. A common representation used in task planning
with LLMs is the scene graph [4].
Early work on scene graphs focused on representing rela-
tionships between objects detected in a single image, where
objects are represented as nodes and spatial relationships
between them as edges [4], [5], [6], [7], [8]. As the potential
of scene graphs became evident, research into 3D scene
graphs for representing 3D environments gained momentum
[9], [10], [11], [12]. With the development of large vision
* Corresponding author
This study was supported by Samsung Display Co., Ltd. (Project No.
IAP2404168).
1Seokjoon Kwon, Hee-Deok Jang, and Dong Eui Chang are with the
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, 34141, Republic of
Korea. {jun115533, jhd6844, dechang}@kaist.ac.kr
2Jae-Hyeon Park and CheolLae Roh are with Mechatronics Technology
Research Center, Samsung Display Co., Yongin-si 17113, Republic of
Korea. {jaehyeon.park53,cl.roh}@samsung.com
Images from 360
degrees rotaon
LVLM based
Scene Graph Generator
Environment Recognion
Scene Graph
Task Planning
Scene Graph
LLM based
Task Planner
User command
Plan1.
Step1. ________
Step2. ________
…
Plan2.
Step1. ________
Step2. ________
…
Mulple Plans
Plan1.
Step1. ___
Step2. ___
…
Final Plan
Execute Plan
Fig. 1: Overall structure of the proposed framework. The
framework consists of an environment recognition phase that
generates a scene graph, and a task planning phase that
receives the scene graph and an user command to generate
a task plan.
language models (LVLMs), a 3D scene graph with rich
semantic information by collecting captions describing each
detected object was developed [12]. Although these advance-
ments contributed to effective environment representation,
the scene graphs typically included only spatial relationships
between objects and did not capture inclusion relationships
between objects and smaller spaces in a room, as all objects
were treated within the same hierarchy. For instance, in the
case of an apple on a desk, both the desk and the apple
were treated as separate objects, even though the desk serves
as a container for other objects, including the apple. While
some studies developed frameworks to construct 3D scene
graphs with hierarchical layers, including objects, rooms, and
buildings [9], [10], [11], the objects within each room still
existed within the same hierarchy, and the scene graphs only
represented spatial relationships. They did not account for
inclusion relationships between objects and spaces, such as
desks or tables that could contain smaller objects. This limi-
tation makes it difﬁcult to plan tasks for abstract commands
like ‘Put the food ingredients in the same space’ based on
these scene graphs. As a result, studies on task planning
using scene graphs [12], [13] often focused on using these
scene graphs on tasks involving speciﬁc actions related to
predeﬁned objects, such as locating a particular object in the
environment. However, many human commands are abstract,
and task planning for such commands requires reasoning
2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
May 19-23, 2025. Atlanta, USA
979-8-3315-4139-2/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE
11010
2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) | 979-8-3315-4139-2/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICRA55743.2025.11128343
Authorized licensed use limited to: Consortium - Saudi Arabia SDL. Downloaded on February 16,2026 at 10:25:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- Page 2 ---
based on inclusion relationships between objects and spaces.
While some research has incorporated environment repre-
sentations that include these relationships for task planning,
these studies assumed that the environment representation is
pre-given [14], [15].
Another cutting-edge element for task planning is the use
of LLMs. Huang et al. [16] showed that language models can
function as zero-shot planners. Singh et al. [17] explored
the potential of language models for task planning in the
form of Pythonic code. As the ﬁeld continued to develop,
there has been an expansion into studies such as [18], [19],
which used feedback loops on LLM outputs to enhance the
stability of task planning, as well as studies that incorporated
traditional task planning methods [20], [21], such as the
planning domain deﬁnition language [22]. However, most
of these studies focused on tasks where the names of the
target objects and the speciﬁc locations to which the objects
must be moved are clearly speciﬁed [23], [24], [25], [26],
[17], [27]. For instance, Ding et al. [23] addressed tasks
like ‘Set the table with a fork and knife,’ while Song et
al. [24] and Min et al. [25] dealt with tasks such as ‘Place
the warm cup in the cabinet’ and ‘Drop the pan on the table,’
respectively. For robots to perform tasks in a more human-
friendly manner, they must also be capable of handling
abstract commands where the target objects or locations are
not explicitly speciﬁed, such as ‘Put the food ingredients in
the same place.’
In this study, we propose an LLM-based autonomous
task planning framework that includes the generation of a
scene graph and a task planner for abstract commands. As
illustrated in Fig. 1, the proposed framework consists of an
environment recognition phase, which structures the robot’s
surrounding environment into a hierarchical scene graph of
room-workspace-object, and a task planning phase, which
generates a task plan for a user command. In the environment
recognition phase, a large vision language model is employed
to autonomously generate a scene graph by identifying
objects and the workspaces to which these objects belong
in images of the environment. Workspaces are deﬁned as
surfaces or spaces smaller than a room that can contain
objects. For example, if an apple is placed on a desk, the
apple is deﬁned as an object, and the desk is deﬁned as
the workspace that contains the apple. This scene graph
represents inclusion relationships between objects and spaces
within the environment by introducing an intermediate layer
of workspaces between the room and the objects. The scene
graph is then passed to the task planning phase, where an
LLM generates multiple plans for executing an abstract user
command. The plan most aligned with the user’s intent is se-
lected from the generated plans and converted into executable
code. Through this process, the framework can perform tasks
based on abstract user commands that do not explicitly
include object names and locations. We validate the proposed
framework in the AI2THOR simulation environment [28],
demonstrating its superior task performance and efﬁciency
when handling abstract commands.
II. METHOD
A. Simulator
We utilize the AI2THOR simulator [28], which consists
of various rooms and objects, as well as one or more robot
agents capable of interacting with objects. This simulator
has been frequently used in research on task planning with
LLMs [21], [24], [29], [30]. In this study, we use AI2THOR’s
iTHOR environment, which comprises a total of 120 rooms,
including 30 each for kitchens, bedrooms, bathrooms, and
living rooms. iTHOR provides built-in functions that allow
control of the robot agent’s actions, which we combine to im-
plement three functions: Pickup Object, Put Object,
and GoTo. The Pickup Object and Put Object func-
tions take the name of an object as a parameter, allowing the
robot agent to pick up or place the object accordingly. The
GoTo function takes the name of an object or workspace
as a parameter, generates a path from the robot agent’s
initial position to the target location using the coordinates
of the object or workspace, and then guides the robot along
the path by generating a sequence of iTHOR commands,
such as RotateRight, RotateLeft, and MoveAhead.
The A* algorithm [31] is employed for path generation. In
iTHOR, the following information can be obtained: the world
coordinates corresponding to speciﬁc pixels in the image
captured by the robot agent, as well as the locations in the
environment where the robot can move without collision.
Additionally, the names and locations of workspaces and
objects in the room, as well as the inclusion relationships
between each workspace and object, can be accessed for
evaluation purposes.
B. Environment Recognition
The goal of the environment recognition phase is to
autonomously generate an object information dictionary and
a scene graph. The object information dictionary is deﬁned
as data consisting of the names and location coordinates of
individual objects. After generating the object information
dictionary, a scene graph is created. The scene graph follows
a hierarchical structure, with the room as the top-level node,
workspaces as the child nodes of the room, and objects as
the child nodes of the workspaces.
1) Object Information Dictionary: The process of gen-
erating the object information dictionary is as follows. At
the start of the framework, the robot agent with a camera
rotates 360 degrees from its initial position, rotating by r
degrees at each step, and performs object detection on the
RGB image at each rotation. The object detector predicts the
bounding boxes and names of the objects in the image and
collects point cloud data corresponding to the pixels inside
the bounding boxes. The object detector used is YOLO [32]
version 8, trained on a custom iTHOR image dataset. For
objects detected across multiple images with the same name,
the method proposed in [12] is applied to distinguish between
objects by measuring geometric and semantic similarities to
assess object identity. If objects with the same name are
determined to be the same physical object, their point clouds
11011
Authorized licensed use limited to: Consortium - Saudi Arabia SDL. Downloaded on February 16,2026 at 10:25:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- Page 3 ---
Workspace query prompt
Near objects query prompt
Mission : 
You’re tasked to identify the workspace of 
the target object from the given image.
Example :
<example of workspace idenficiation>
Definition : 
<Definition of Workspace>
Question :
What is the workspace of {object} in the 
image? 
Mission : 
You’re tasked to identify objects near the 
target object from the given image.
Question :
What are the near objects of {object} in 
the image? 
Fig. 2: Prompts with questions for obtaining workspaces and
near objects information.
.8./
.8./
.8./
6CTIGV 1DLGEV  *QWUG RNCPV
 9QTMURCEG  (NQQT
 0GCT QDLGEVU &KUJ $TGCF
*QWUG 2NCPV
9QTMURCEG 
 %QWPVGT  
 (NQQT  
0GCT QDLGEVU 
 &KUJ  
 $TGCF 
 %JCKT  
 2QVCVQ 

Workspace?
Near objects?
Near objects?
Workspace?
Near objects?
Near objects?
Workspace?
Near objects?
Near objects?
6CTIGV 1DLGEV  *QWUG RNCPV
 9QTMURCEG  %QWPVGT
 0GCT QDLGEVU &KUJ $TGCF%JCKT
6CTIGV 1DLGEV  *QWUG RNCPV
 9QTMURCEG  %QWPVGT
 0GCT QDLGEVU &KUJ $TGCF 2QVCVQ
Fig. 3: Process for deriving a spatial relation dictionary.
are merged. If objects with the same name are different,
they are differentiated by appending sufﬁxes such as 1, 2,
and so on. The average coordinate of each object’s point
cloud is considered its location. Through this process, the
object information dictionary is generated, containing the
names and locations of individual objects present in the
environment.
2) Scene Graph: In the ﬁrst stage of scene graph gen-
eration, by iterating over the images in which objects are
detected by the object detector, two sequential questions
are asked to the LVLM for each object present in each
image. These questions aim to obtain information about the
workspace and near objects for each detected object in the
images. The prompt given to the LVLM for each question is
illustrated in Fig. 2, where the name of the detected object
is inserted into the object name section marked in blue.
The LVLM processes the images and outputs the names of
workspaces and near objects associated with the detected
object. The number of mentions of each workspace and near
object is aggregated across images for the detected object.
We refer to this information as the spatial relation dictionary
of the detected object. An example of deriving a spatial
relation dictionary is shown in Fig. 3, with a house plant
that appears in three images. For the workspace, the counter
is mentioned twice, and the ﬂoor is mentioned once. For near
objects, the dish and bread are each mentioned three times,
while the chair and potato are each mentioned once. This
information is summarized into a spatial relation dictionary,
as shown in the rightmost box of Fig. 3. After generating
the spatial relation dictionaries for all detected objects, we
divide the detected objects into two sets based on whether a
dominant workspace exists. The ﬁrst set consists of detected
objects with the dictionaries in which one workspace has
a higher mention count than the others. For each detected
object in this set, we remove the other workspaces and retain
only the one with the highest mention count. The second
set consists of detected objects with the dictionaries where
multiple workspaces have the same mention count.
Detected object’s
Spatial Relation Dictionary
Workspace already 
exists in the scene graph?
Add the workspace in the scene graph & 
Add the object below the newly added workspace node
Get workspaces 
with same name
Calculate 
association scores
Select a workspace with 
the highest score
Higher than the threshold?
Add the object below the 
workspace node
No
Yes
No
Yes
Fig. 4: Generation of an initial scene graph.
We use the ﬁrst set to generate an initial scene graph,
as outlined in Fig. 4. We begin with a scene graph that
contains only room nodes and refer to the objects of the
ﬁrst set one by one to execute the following processes. If
the workspace name of the detected object does not exist
in the scene graph, the workspace is added below the room
node, and the detected object is added below this workspace
node. If workspaces with the same name already exist in the
scene graph, we must handle cases where the new workspace
is actually different from the existing workspace nodes. In
such cases, we calculate the association score between the
detected object and each existing workspace node with the
same name. The association score is deﬁned as the sum of
the mention count of the workspace in the detected object’s
spatial relation dictionary and the mention counts of near
objects of the detected object that are below the existing
workspace node with the same name. After calculating
the association scores, the highest score is compared to
a predeﬁned threshold. If the highest score exceeds the
threshold, the detected object is added below the existing
workspace node with the highest score. If the scores do not
exceed the threshold, a new workspace with the same name
is created in the scene graph, and the object is added below
that workspace node. In this case, sufﬁxes such as 1, 2, etc.,
are appended to the workspace names to distinguish the new
workspace from existing workspaces with the same name in
the scene graph.
After generating an initial scene graph with the ﬁrst set,
we add the detected objects from the second set to the scene
graph one by one using the following procedures. If none
of the workspaces for the detected object exist in the scene
graph, one of the workspaces is selected randomly and added
below the room node, and the detected object is added below
this workspace node. If some workspace names already exist
in the scene graph, a process similar to that used for the
ﬁrst set is executed for those workspaces. Once the scene
graph generation is complete, we add the workspace names
and locations to the object information dictionary created
in Section II-B.1. A workspace’s location is calculated as
the average of the point clouds of the objects below this
workspace node. The names and locations of objects and
11012
Authorized licensed use limited to: Consortium - Saudi Arabia SDL. Downloaded on February 16,2026 at 10:25:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- Page 4 ---
Mission :
You’re tasked with generating plans to
follow user’s command
Input :
<Input format explanation>
Rules :
<Rules to follow>
Output :
<Output format explanation>
Example :
- <example user command>
- <example scene graph>
- <example of a reasoning process>
- <example of an output>
[USER] :
- command :
I have to study soon, so prepare the desk.
- scene graph :
{desk:[toy,book,toothpaste],
bed:[laptop,pencil,pillow],
couch:[cushion]}
[Plan1]
Step1. The toothpaste is used for studying,
so it should be left on the desk.
Step2. The pencil is needed for studying,
so it needs to be moved to the desk.
...
[Plan2]
Step1. The toy is not needed for studying,
so it needs to be moved to the couch.
Step2. The laptop is needed for studying,
so it should be moved to the desk.
... 
prompt
output
[Plan1]
Step1. The toothpaste is used for studying,
so it should be left on the desk.
Step2. The pencil is needed for studying,
so it needs to be moved to the desk.
...
[Plan2]
Step1. The toy is not needed for studying,
so it needs to be moved to the couch.
Step2. The laptop is needed for studying,
so it should be moved to the desk.
... 
[Plan2]
Step1. The toy is not needed for studying,
so it needs to be moved to the couch.
Step2. The laptop is needed for studying,
so it should be moved to the desk.
... 
Command :
I have to study soon, so prepare the desk.
Mission :
You’re tasked with generating a sequence
of python codes for a given task plan.
Input :
<Input format explanation>
Action function :
GoTo(object/workspace)
Pickup_Object(object)
Put_Object(object)
Output :
<Output format explanation>
Example :
- <example of a task plan>
- <example of an output>
[USER] :
Task Plan :
Step1. The toy is not needed for studying,
so it needs to be moved to the couch.
Step2. The laptop is needed for studying,
so it should be moved to the desk.
...
[Code]
Step1. [GoTo(toy), Pickup_Object(toy),
GoTo(couch), Put_Object(couch)]
Step2. [GoTo(laptop), Pickup_Object(laptop),
GoTo(desk), Put_Object(laptop)]
...
is ne
ne
ne
ne
ne
ne
ne
ne
ne
ne
ne
ne
ne
ne
need
e ed f
to be mo
m ve
not needed
Relevance check
< Relevance score of each plan >
[Plan1] : 2.654
[Plan2] : 4.847
... 
Select the best plan
GoTo(toy), 
Pickup_Object(toy)...
prompt
output
Stage 1. Multiple Plan Generation
Stage 2. Final Plan Selection
Stage 3. Code Generation & Plan Execution
BEST PLAN
Fig. 5: Illustration of a task planning phase. It consists of three stages which are multiple plan generation stage, ﬁnal plan
selection stage, code generation and plan execution stage.
workspaces in the object information dictionary are used as
input for the GoTo function during task execution.
C. Task Planning
In the task planning phase, given the user command, we
use three stages to output the best task plan in robot code.
These stages are multiple plan generation, ﬁnal plan selec-
tion, and plan execution after code generation as illustrated in
Fig. 5. Detailed prompts given to the LLM are uploaded on
our GitHub page: https://github.com/joon725/LLM-Planner-
for-Abstract-Commands/. In the ﬁrst stage, which is called
multiple plan generation, we transform the scene graph
from
Section
II-B.2
into
a
Python
dictionary
form:
{key1:value1, key2:value2, · · · , keyN:valueN}, where N is
the total number of workspace nodes in the scene graph,
keyi is the ith workspace node, and valuei is the list of
object nodes below the ith workspace node. An example of
this form is shown in the middle left blue box of Fig. 5.
Next, we create a prompt, as shown on the left side of Fig.
5, using the user command and the transformed scene graph
in the [USER] section of the prompt. The LLM receives
this prompt as input and generates two or more multiple
plans, with each plan consisting of several steps to execute
the command individually. The maximum number of plans
is not set and varies each time the LLM generates multiple
plans. In Fig. 5, we display two plans for instructional clarity.
In the second stage, which is called ﬁnal plan selection, we
quantitatively calculate the degree of relevance between each
step of the plans and the user command. Let us deﬁne P as
the total number of plans generated by the LLM. Let Sp, (p ∈
1, 2, . . . , P) represent the total number of sequential steps for
the pth plan, and Lp,s ∈L, (s ∈1, 2, . . . , Sp) represent the
natural language sentence of the sth step in the pth plan,
where L is the set of all natural language sentences. Lu ∈L
is deﬁned as the user command, and f(·) : L →R768 as
the text feature extractor of the vision-language model BLIP
[33]. We deﬁne the relevance score RSp,s of Lp,s and Lu as
follows:
RSp,s =
f(Lp,s) · f(Lu)
∥f(Lp,s)∥∥f(Lu)∥,
which represents the cosine similarity between the text
feature vector of Lp,s and Lu, where ∥· ∥denotes the Eu-
clidean norm of a vector. After calculating all the relevance
scores, we remove the steps with a relevance score below a
predeﬁned threshold from the plans. This threshold is set to
0.5, where the number of 0.5 has been selected as an optimal
one after several empirical trials. Through this process, steps
in the plans with a low degree of semantic relevance to user’s
command are eliminated. Next, we calculate a relevance
score for each plan by summing the relevance scores of
the remaining steps in that plan. The plan with the highest
relevance score is selected, as it is the most relevant to the
user’s command among the generated plans.
In the ﬁnal stage, which is called plan execution after code
generation, we create a prompt as shown in the right part of
Fig. 5, with the selected plan in the [USER] section. The
LLM receives this prompt as input and generates code using
the action functions from Section II-A. By executing this
11013
Authorized licensed use limited to: Consortium - Saudi Arabia SDL. Downloaded on February 16,2026 at 10:25:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- Page 5 ---
TABLE I: Rooms, workspaces, and object categories of the
iTHOR environment.
Room
Workspace
Object category
Kitchen
Dining table
Counter
Food ingredients
Tableware
Cooking utensils
Bedroom
Desk
Bed
Electronics
Sports equipment
code step by step from top to bottom, the iTHOR robot agent
carries out the command.
III. EXPERIMENT
A. Experimental Setup and Results
In this study, experiments are conducted in the iTHOR
environment across a total of 60 rooms, with 30 kitchen
rooms and 30 bedroom rooms. The rooms, workspaces, and
objects in the iTHOR environment are tabulated in Table
I. Since there are a multitude of objects, we classify them
into ﬁve categories based on their usage: food ingredients,
tableware, cooking utensils, electronics, and sports equip-
ment. The LVLM used in the environment recognition phase
utilizes OpenAI’s GPT-4o [34] API, while the LLM used
in the task planning phase employs OpenAI’s GPT-4 [35]
API. The association score threshold for the scene graph
is set to 4 for the kitchens and 1 for the bedrooms, after
conducting experiments with thresholds ranging from 1 to
20 and selecting the values that yielded the highest average
v-measure [36], a well-known clustering metric, for each
environment.
We design four types of tasks with abstract commands
of increasing difﬁculty, as shown in Table II. Task 1 is
composed of tasks such as ‘Place the food ingredients
on the dining table,’ where objects from a single object
category need to be moved to a speciﬁc workspace. Task
2 is composed of tasks like ‘Gather the food ingredients in
the same location,’ where the goal is to gather objects from a
single object category into the same workspace, which is not
explicitly speciﬁed. Task 3 is composed of tasks like ‘Place
the food ingredients on the dining table and the tableware
on the counter,’ which requires placing objects from two
object categories at two different workspaces respectively.
Task 4 is composed of tasks like ‘Place the food ingredients
on the dining table and move the objects that are not
food ingredients away from the dining table,’ where objects
from a single object category must be placed in a speciﬁc
workspace, while all other objects not belonging to that
category must be moved to different workspaces. Task 1,
Task 2, Task 3, and Task 4 are run 60, 32, 25, and 46
times, respectively, using various combinations of rooms,
workspaces, and object categories. On average, each task
contains 2.02, 2.3, 3.58, and 4.52 objects from the target
object category in the environment. The actual total number
of objects in each task is higher than these numbers, as there
are also objects from other categories.
We devise the two metrics of executability and average
accuracy to best describe the performance of autonomous
task planning, which are adapted from the metrics used in
TABLE II: Four types of tasks.
Task
Command
Task 1
Place an {object category} at a speciﬁc {workspace}
Task 2
Gather an {object category} at the same place
Task 3
Place two {object categories} at two different {workspaces} respectively
Task 4
Place an {object category} at a speciﬁc {workspace}, and move the
objects that are not in the category away from that {workspace}
[17], [18], [20], [21], [24]. Executability (%) is deﬁned as
the number of successfully executed tasks divided by the
total number of task runs. When the LLM generates steps
involving things not present in the environment, the plan
including those steps cannot be executed. High executability
can be interpreted as having a prompt with appropriate in-
structions and input information, or as having a good process
for eliminating infeasible steps. Accuracy is calculated for
each task run and is deﬁned as the ratio of correctly moved
objects in the chosen object category. If an object is not
moved or is moved to the wrong workspace, it is considered
a failure. By averaging the accuracies, we obtain the average
accuracy.
For comparison, two other task planning methods using
LLM are considered. The ﬁrst method is SayPlan [14], which
utilizes a scene graph and LLM. It generates a single plan
based on a reduced scene graph, created through a semantic
search step that selects only the nodes relevant to the task
from the scene graph. Both the semantic search step and
task planning are performed by the LLM, and we implement
the prompts as proposed in [14], except for any formal
mismatches. To ensure a fair comparison, the feedback loop
for revising plans is excluded, and the plan is generated
only once. The second method is the Na¨ıve LLM Planner,
proposed in [16], which generates a single plan using the
LLM. In this method, the LLM generates each step of
the plan sequentially, taking the previous steps as input to
generate the next step. For both methods, OpenAI’s GPT-4
API is used.
The experimental results for our framework, SayPlan, and
the Na¨ıve LLM Planner are presented in Table III. For the
four tasks, the average value for each metric is compared.
The proposed framework shows the best performance in both
of executability and average accuracy. For executability, the
proposed framework outperforms SayPlan by 10.27%p and
the Na¨ıve LLM Planner by 27.42%p, where the symbol of
%p denotes the percentage point. For average accuracy, the
proposed framework outperforms SayPlan by 5.25%p and
the Na¨ıve LLM Planner by 29.23%p. These experimental
results indicate that the proposed framework accomplishes
the tasks most successfully for abstract commands among
the compared methods.
B. Ablation Study
To analyze the inﬂuence of the proposed scene graph struc-
ture, an ablation study is conducted. The variant (Ours with
general SG) uses a general scene graph that contains only
spatial relationships between objects without an intermediate
layer of workspaces. For this scene graph, we refer to the
method proposed in [12], which generates a scene graph
containing nodes for objects and edges for representing the
11014
Authorized licensed use limited to: Consortium - Saudi Arabia SDL. Downloaded on February 16,2026 at 10:25:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- Page 6 ---
TABLE III: Results for task planning.
Task
Ours
SayPlan
Na¨ıve
LLM Planner
Ours with
general SG
Executability
(%)
Task 1
90
87.5
55
88.3
Task 2
87.5
84.38
87.5
80
Task 3
76
60
40
72
Task 4
95.23
75.76
56.52
73.81
Avg
87.18
76.91
59.76
78.53
Average accuracy
(%)
Task 1
75.6
74.58
25.83
72.22
Task 2
74.22
72.4
61.2
64.58
Task 3
54.93
53.07
33.87
51.6
Task 4
68.56
52.27
35.48
46.16
Avg
68.33
63.08
39.1
58.64
spatial relationships between the objects. The results of the
ablation study are shown in the rightmost column of Table
III. For the both metrics, the originally proposed framework
demonstrates the best performance. For executability, the
proposed framework outperforms the variant by 8.65%p. In
terms of average accuracy, our framework achieves 9.69%p
higher than the variant. The comparison of the original
framework with the variant shows that implementing our
scene graph structure improves the accuracy of task planning.
C. Experiments with Highly Abstract Commands
To showcase the framework’s ability to perform tasks
based on more abstract commands, additional experiments
are conducted. These experiments take place in one of the
kitchens and one of the bedrooms. For each room, the user
commands ‘Prepare for cooking before I start cooking for
dinner.’ and ‘I am going to sleep soon, prepare for it.’ are
given, respectively. These commands convey only the user’s
intent without specifying any target objects or locations,
making them highly abstract. For the ﬁrst command, the
executed task plan includes moving the pot and pan from
the counter to the stove burner, relocating the potato from
the sink to the counter, and moving the bread from the
kitchen island to the counter. The task execution process
for this command is illustrated in Fig. 6. For the second
command, the ﬁnal task plan includes moving the laptop
from the bed to the desk, placing the tennis racket and
basketball from the bed to the ﬂoor, and relocating the book
from the bed to the desk. These plans are quite reasonable,
and the results demonstrate that the proposed framework
is capable of successfully executing tasks based on highly
abstract commands.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
In this study, we propose an LLM-based autonomous
task planning framework for abstract user commands. The
framework integrates autonomous environment recognition
with subsequent task planning. The scene graph generated by
the LVLM during the environment recognition phase struc-
tures the environment with semantic inclusion information
between objects and small spaces in the room. The task
planning phase, which takes the scene graph and an abstract
user command as inputs, generates multiple task plans and
selects the ﬁnal plan that best matches the user’s command.
GoTo(pot)
Pickup_Object(pot)
GoTo(stove burner)
Put_Object(pot)
GoTo(pan)
Pickup_Object(pan)
GoTo(stove burner)
Put_Object(pan)
GoTo(potato)
Pickup_Object(potato)
GoTo(counter)
Put_Object(potato)
GoTo(bread)
Pickup_Object(bread)
GoTo(counter)
Put_Object(bread)








Fig. 6: Task execution for ‘Prepare for cooking before I start
cooking for dinner.’
The combination of the scene graph and the task planning
process enables successful task execution, even for abstract
commands, as validated through comparative analysis with
other methods and an ablation study of variants of the
proposed framework. However, the proposed framework has
certain limitations. Since LVLM is used to generate the
scene graph, ambiguity may arise when determining the
workspace to which each object belongs. Additionally, the
scene graph generation process requires multiple images
from different viewpoints to accurately capture the spatial
relationships, leading to potential inefﬁciencies in real-time
applications. For future work, we aim to enhance the scene
graph generation process solving the algorithmic limitations,
and apply the proposed framework in real-world settings by
integrating open source LLMs for task planning making the
framework more accessible and practical.
REFERENCES
[1] T. B. Brown, “Language models are few-shot learners,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.14165, 2020.
[2] E. Zelikman, Y. Wu, J. Mu, and N. Goodman, “Star: Bootstrapping
reasoning with reasoning,” Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, vol. 35, pp. 15 476–15 488, 2022.
[3] X. Huang, W. Liu, X. Chen, X. Wang, H. Wang, D. Lian, Y. Wang,
R. Tang, and E. Chen, “Understanding the planning of LLM agents:
A survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.02716, 2024.
[4] J. Johnson, R. Krishna, M. Stark, L.-J. Li, D. Shamma, M. Bernstein,
and L. Fei-Fei, “Image retrieval using scene graphs,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2015, pp. 3668–3678.
[5] D. Xu, Y. Zhu, C. B. Choy, and L. Fei-Fei, “Scene graph generation
by iterative message passing,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
On Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2017, pp. 5410–5419.
11015
Authorized licensed use limited to: Consortium - Saudi Arabia SDL. Downloaded on February 16,2026 at 10:25:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- Page 7 ---
[6] J. Gu, H. Zhao, Z. Lin, S. Li, J. Cai, and M. Ling, “Scene graph
generation with external knowledge and image reconstruction,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2019, pp. 1969–1978.
[7] Y. Li, W. Ouyang, B. Zhou, K. Wang, and X. Wang, “Scene graph
generation from objects, phrases and region captions,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV),
Oct 2017.
[8] S. Khandelwal, M. Suhail, and L. Sigal, “Segmentation-grounded
scene graph generation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Interna-
tional Conference on Computer Vision, 2021, pp. 15 879–15 889.
[9] I. Armeni, Z.-Y. He, J. Gwak, A. R. Zamir, M. Fischer, J. Malik, and
S. Savarese, “3D scene graph: A structure for uniﬁed semantics, 3D
space, and camera,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international
conference on computer vision, 2019, pp. 5664–5673.
[10] A. Rosinol, A. Violette, M. Abate, N. Hughes, Y. Chang, J. Shi,
A. Gupta, and L. Carlone, “Kimera: From slam to spatial perception
with 3D dynamic scene graphs,” The International Journal of Robotics
Research, vol. 40, no. 12-14, pp. 1510–1546, 2021.
[11] N. Hughes, Y. Chang, and L. Carlone, “Hydra: A real-time spatial
perception system for 3D scene graph construction and optimization,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.13360, 2022.
[12] Q. Gu, A. Kuwajerwala, S. Morin, K. M. Jatavallabhula, B. Sen,
A. Agarwal, C. Rivera, W. Paul, K. Ellis, R. Chellappa, et al.,
“Conceptgraphs: Open-vocabulary 3D scene graphs for perception and
planning,” in 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2024, pp. 5021–5028.
[13] Z. Dai, A. Asgharivaskasi, T. Duong, S. Lin, M.-E. Tzes, G. Pappas,
and N. Atanasov, “Optimal scene graph planning with large language
model guidance,” in 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2024, pp. 14 062–14 069.
[14] K. Rana, J. Haviland, S. Garg, J. Abou-Chakra, I. Reid, and N. Suen-
derhauf, “Sayplan: Grounding large language models using 3D scene
graphs for scalable task planning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.06135,
2023.
[15] Z. Ni, X. Deng, C. Tai, X. Zhu, Q. Xie, W. Huang, X. Wu, and L. Zeng,
“Grid: Scene-graph-based instruction-driven robotic task planning,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.07726, 2023.
[16] W. Huang, P. Abbeel, D. Pathak, and I. Mordatch, “Language models
as zero-shot planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied
agents,” in International Conference on Machine Learning.
PMLR,
2022, pp. 9118–9147.
[17] I. Singh, V. Blukis, A. Mousavian, A. Goyal, D. Xu, J. Tremblay,
D. Fox, J. Thomason, and A. Garg, “Progprompt: Generating situated
robot task plans using large language models,” in 2023 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2023,
pp. 11 523–11 530.
[18] Z. Zhou, J. Song, K. Yao, Z. Shu, and L. Ma, “ISR-LLM: Iterative
self-reﬁned large language model for long-horizon sequential task
planning,” in 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2024, pp. 2081–2088.
[19] S. H. Vemprala, R. Bonatti, A. Bucker, and A. Kapoor, “Chatgpt for
robotics: Design principles and model abilities,” IEEE Access, 2024.
[20] Y. Liu, L. Palmieri, S. Koch, I. Georgievski, and M. Aiello, “Delta:
Decomposed efﬁcient long-term robot task planning using large lan-
guage models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.03275, 2024.
[21] A. Mavrogiannis, C. Mavrogiannis, and Y. Aloimonos, “Cook2LTL:
Translating cooking recipes to LTL formulae using large language
models,” in 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2024, pp. 17 679–17 686.
[22] C. Aeronautiques, A. Howe, C. Knoblock, I. D. McDermott, A. Ram,
M. Veloso, D. Weld, D. W. Sri, A. Barrett, D. Christianson, et al.,
“PDDL— the planning domain deﬁnition language,” Technical Report,
Tech. Rep., 1998.
[23] Y. Ding, X. Zhang, C. Paxton, and S. Zhang, “Task and motion
planning with large language models for object rearrangement,” in
2023 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS).
IEEE, 2023, pp. 2086–2092.
[24] C. H. Song, J. Wu, C. Washington, B. M. Sadler, W.-L. Chao, and
Y. Su, “LLM-planner: Few-shot grounded planning for embodied
agents with large language models,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
International Conference on Computer Vision, 2023, pp. 2998–3009.
[25] S. Y. Min, D. S. Chaplot, P. Ravikumar, Y. Bisk, and R. Salakhutdinov,
“Film: Following instructions in language with modular methods,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.07342, 2021.
[26] R. Wang, Z. Yang, Z. Zhao, X. Tong, Z. Hong, and K. Qian,
“LLM-based robot task planning with exceptional handling for general
purpose service robots,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.15646, 2024.
[27] L. Sun, D. K. Jha, C. Hori, S. Jain, R. Corcodel, X. Zhu, M. Tomizuka,
and D. Romeres, “Interactive planning using large language models
for partially observable robotic tasks,” in 2024 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2024, pp. 14 054–
14 061.
[28] E. Kolve, R. Mottaghi, W. Han, E. VanderBilt, L. Weihs, A. Her-
rasti, M. Deitke, K. Ehsani, D. Gordon, Y. Zhu, et al., “AI2-
THOR: An interactive 3D environment for visual ai,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1712.05474, 2017.
[29] S. Nayak, A. M. Orozco, M. T. Have, V. Thirumalai, J. Zhang,
D. Chen, A. Kapoor, E. Robinson, K. Gopalakrishnan, J. Harrison,
et al., “Long-horizon planning for multi-agent robots in partially
observable environments,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.10031, 2024.
[30] S. S. Kannan, V. L. Venkatesh, and B.-C. Min, “SMART-LLM: Smart
multi-agent robot task planning using large language models,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2309.10062, 2023.
[31] P. E. Hart, N. J. Nilsson, and B. Raphael, “A formal basis for the
heuristic determination of minimum cost paths,” IEEE Transactions
on Systems Science and Cybernetics, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 100–107, 1968.
[32] J. Redmon, S. Divvala, R. Girshick, and A. Farhadi, “You only look
once: Uniﬁed, real-time object detection,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2016, pp.
779–788.
[33] J. Li, D. Li, C. Xiong, and S. Hoi, “BLIP: Bootstrapping language-
image pre-training for uniﬁed vision-language understanding and gen-
eration,” in International Conference on Machine Learning.
PMLR,
2022, pp. 12 888–12 900.
[34] OpenAI, “Hello gpt-4o,” 2024, accessed on August 30, 2024.
[Online]. Available: https://openai.com/index/hello-gpt-4o/
[35] J. Achiam, S. Adler, S. Agarwal, L. Ahmad, I. Akkaya, F. L. Aleman,
D. Almeida, J. Altenschmidt, S. Altman, S. Anadkat, et al., “GPT-4
technical report,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
[36] A. Rosenberg and J. Hirschberg, “V-measure: A conditional entropy-
based external cluster evaluation measure,” in Proceedings of the 2007
joint conference on empirical methods in natural language processing
and computational natural language learning (EMNLP-CoNLL), 2007,
pp. 410–420.
11016
Authorized licensed use limited to: Consortium - Saudi Arabia SDL. Downloaded on February 16,2026 at 10:25:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
